<!--
// Assisted by watsonx Code Assistant
// Code generated by WCA@IBM in this programming language is not approved for use in IBM product development.
-->

# Heat Templates in HotStack Scenarios

Heat templates are used in HotStack scenarios to define and manage the infrastructure as code. They are essentially YAML files that describe the resources required to deploy and configure the OpenStack resources. This document provides an overview of Heat templates used in HotStack scenarios for deploying and configuring OpenStack resources, specifically for OpenShift Container Platform (OCP) and Red Hat OpenStack Platform (RHOSO).

- [Heat Templates in HotStack Scenarios](#heat-templates-in-hotstack-scenarios)
  - [Heat Template Parameters in HotStack Scenarios](#heat-template-parameters-in-hotstack-scenarios)
  - [Heat Template Resources in HotStack Scenarios](#heat-template-resources-in-hotstack-scenarios)
    - [Network Resources (Networks, Subnets and Routers)](#network-resources-networks-subnets-and-routers)
    - [Heat Template Resources for Controller Node in HotStack Scenarios](#heat-template-resources-for-controller-node-in-hotstack-scenarios)
      - [Cloud configuration resources for the Controller node](#cloud-configuration-resources-for-the-controller-node)
    - [Heat Template Resources for OCP Master Nodes in HotStack Scenarios](#heat-template-resources-for-ocp-master-nodes-in-hotstack-scenarios)
    - [Heat Template Resources for pre-provisioned Dataplane Nodes in HotStack Scenarios](#heat-template-resources-for-pre-provisioned-dataplane-nodes-in-hotstack-scenarios)
    - [Heat Template Resources for Dataplane Baremetal Hosts in HotStack Scenarios](#heat-template-resources-for-dataplane-baremetal-hosts-in-hotstack-scenarios)
    - [Heat Template Resources for Ironic Nodes in HotStack Scenarios](#heat-template-resources-for-ironic-nodes-in-hotstack-scenarios)
  - [Heat Template Output Values in HotStack Scenarios](#heat-template-output-values-in-hotstack-scenarios)
    - [Output Values](#output-values)


## Heat Template Parameters in HotStack Scenarios

This section explains the typical parameters defined in a Heat Orchestration Template (HOT) used in a HotStack scenario. These parameters allow users to customize the deployment to their specific requirements. Some scenarios will have additional parameters for other node types, similar to the `compute_params` below, other scenarios may have the same for other node types, for example: `networker_params`, `ironic_params`.

- **dns_servers**
   - **Type**: comma_delimited_list
   - **Default**: ["8.8.8.8", "8.8.4.4"]
   - **Description**: A comma-delimited list of DNS servers.

- **ntp_servers**
   - **Type**: comma_delimited_list
   - **Default**: []
   - **Description**: A comma-delimited list of NTP servers.

- **controller_ssh_pub_key**
   - **Type**: string
   - **Description**: The public SSH key for the Controller node.

- **dataplane_ssh_pub_key**
   - **Type**: string
   - **Description**: The public SSH key for the dataplane nodes.

- **keypair**
   - **Type**: string
   - **Default**: "default"
   - **Description**: The name of the keypair to use for SSH access.

- **controller_params**
   - **Type**: json
   - **Default**:
     ```json
     {
       "image": "hotstack-controller",
       "flavor": "hotstack.small"
     }
     ```
   - **Description**: Parameters specific to the Controller node.

- **ocp_master_params**
   - **Type**: json
   - **Default**:
     ```json
     {
       "image": "ipxe-boot-usb",
       "flavor": "hotstack.xxlarge"
     }
     ```
   - **Description**: Parameters specific to the OCP master nodes.

- **compute_params**
   - **Type**: json
   - **Default**:
     ```json
     {
       "image": "CentOS-Stream-GenericCloud-9",
       "flavor": "hotstack.large"
     }
     ```
   - **Description**: Parameters specific to the Compute nodes.

- **router_external_network**
   - **Type**: string
   - **Default**: "public"
   - **Description**: The name of the external network for the router.

- **floating_ip_network**
    - **Type**: string
    - **Default**: "public"
    - **Description**: The name of the network for floating IPs.

- **net_value_specs**
    - **Type**: json
    - **Default**: {}
    - **Description**: Network value specifications.


## Heat Template Resources in HotStack Scenarios

This section explains the Openstack networking related resources defined in a Heat Orchestration Template (HOT) used in a HotStack scenario. Different scenarios can have additional resources depending on the specific needs, the resources below will be in most scenarios.

### Network Resources (Networks, Subnets and Routers)

- **Networks**
   - **machine-net**: A Neutron network with port security disabled, using the `net_value_specs` parameter for additional configuration.
   - **ctlplane-net**: A Neutron network with port security disabled, using the `net_value_specs` parameter for additional configuration.
   - **internal-api-net**: A Neutron network with port security disabled, using the `net_value_specs` parameter for additional configuration.
   - **storage-net**: A Neutron network with port security disabled, using the `net_value_specs` parameter for additional configuration.
   - **tenant-net**: A Neutron network with port security disabled, using the `net_value_specs` parameter for additional configuration.

- **Subnets**
   - **machine-subnet**: A Neutron subnet connected to the `machine-net` network, with a CIDR of 192.168.32.0/24, enabling DHCP, and specifying DNS nameservers.
   - **ctlplane-subnet**: A Neutron subnet connected to the `ctlplane-net` network, with a CIDR of 192.168.122.0/24, disabling DHCP, and specifying an allocation pool and DNS nameservers.
   - **internal-api-subnet**: A Neutron subnet connected to the `internal-api-net` network, with a CIDR of 172.17.0.0/24, disabling DHCP, and specifying an allocation pool.
   - **storage-subnet**: A Neutron subnet connected to the `storage-net` network, with a CIDR of 172.18.0.0/24, disabling DHCP, and specifying an allocation pool.
   - **tenant-subnet**: A Neutron subnet connected to the `tenant-net` network, with a CIDR of 172.19.0.0/24, disabling DHCP, and specifying an allocation pool.

- **Routers**
   - **router**: A Neutron router with an external gateway connected to the `router_external_network`.
   - **machine-net-router-interface**: A Neutron router interface connecting the `router` to the `machine-subnet`.
   - **ctlplane-net-router-interface**: A Neutron router interface connecting the `router` to the `ctlplane-subnet`.

### Heat Template Resources for Controller Node in HotStack Scenarios

This section explains the resources defined in a Heat Orchestration Template (HOT) used in a HotStack scenario to create a Neutron port, a floating IP, and a Nova server for the Controller node.

- **controller-machine-port**
   - **Type**: OS::Neutron::Port
   - **Purpose**: Creates a Neutron port with a fixed IP address (192.168.32.3) for the Controller node.

- **controller-floating-ip**
   - **Type**: OS::Neutron::FloatingIP
   - **Purpose**: Associates a floating IP with the `controller-machine-port` resource, allowing external access to the Controller node.

- **controller**
   - **Type**: OS::Nova::Server
   - **Purpose**: Creates a Nova server for the Controller node using the specified image, flavor, and network interface. The user data for the Nova server includes the combined configuration of user management, file writing, and run commands.

#### Cloud configuration resources for the Controller node

This section explains the resources defined in a Heat Orchestration Template (HOT) used in a HotStack scenario to configure the Controller node. These resources include user management, file writing, run commands, and multipart configuration.

These resources are typically identical in all scenarios, with the `controller-write-files` and `controller-runcmd` being the exception. Depending on the scenario the host records and wildcard records in dnsmasq will be different. For any multi node OCP scenario haproxy is also configured, enabled and started on the Controller node.

- **controller_users**
   - **Type**: OS::Heat::CloudConfig
   - **Purpose**: Creates a new user named "zuul" with specific settings, such as the SSH public key.

- **controller-write-files**
   - **Type**: OS::Heat::CloudConfig
   - **Purpose**: Configures the dnsmasq service, sets DNS forwarders, host records, wildcard records, and updates the resolv.conf, NetworkManager  and HAProxy configuration files.

- **controller-runcmd**
   - **Type**: OS::Heat::CloudConfig
   - **Purpose**: Enables and starts the dnsmasq, HAProxy and httpd services, sets the SELinux enforcing mode to permissive, and modifies the Apache HTTP server configuration.

- **controller-init**
   - **Type**: OS::Heat::MultipartMime
   - **Purpose**: Combines the user management, file writing, and run commands into a single configuration that is applied during the Controller node's initialization.

### Heat Template Resources for OCP Master Nodes in HotStack Scenarios

This section explains the resources defined in a Heat Orchestration Template (HOT) used in a HotStack scenario to configure the OCP master nodes. These resources include DHCP options, Neutron ports, a trunk port, Cinder volumes, and a Nova server. For multi node scenarios a single shared `extra-dhcp-opts-value` resource can be used.

- **extra-dhcp-opts-value**
   - **Type**: OS::Heat::Value
   - **Purpose**: Defines DHCP options for the OCP master node, including an option to set the HTTPClient for DHCP discovery and an option to provide the location of the OCP Agent Installers iPXE boot script.

- **masterX-machine-port**
   - **Type**: OS::Neutron::Port
   - **Purpose**: Creates a Neutron port with a fixed IP address for the OCP master node, applying the DHCP options defined in the `extra-dhcp-opts-value` resource.

- **masterX-ctlplane-trunk-parent-port**
   - **Type**: OS::Neutron::Port
   - **Purpose**: Creates a Neutron port with a fixed IP address for the OCP master node's control plane interface.

- **masterX-internal-api-port**
   - **Type**: OS::Neutron::Port
   - **Purpose**: Creates a Neutron port with a fixed IP address for the OCP master node's internal API interface.

- **masterX-storage-port**
   - **Type**: OS::Neutron::Port
   - **Purpose**: Creates a Neutron port with a fixed IP address for the OCP master node's storage interface.

- **masterX-tenant-port**
   - **Type**: OS::Neutron::Port
   - **Purpose**: Creates a Neutron port with a fixed IP address for the OCP master node's tenant interface.

- **masterX-trunk0**
   - **Type**: OS::Neutron::Trunk
   - **Purpose**: Combines multiple network interfaces (internal API, storage and tenant) into a single trunk port, allowing the OCP master node to communicate with different networks using VLAN segmentation.

- **masterX-ironic-port**
   - **Type**: OS::Neutron::Port
   - **Purpose**: Creates a Neutron port for the OCP master node's Ironic interface.

- **masterX-lvms-vol0**, **masterX-cinder-vol0**, **masterX-cinder-vol1**, and **masterX-cinder-vol2**
    - **Type**: OS::Cinder::Volume
    - **Purpose**: Creates Cinder volumes to be attached to the OCP master node as block devices.

- **masterX**
    - **Type**: OS::Nova::Server
    - **Purpose**: Creates a Nova server for the OCP master node using the specified image, flavor, and network interfaces. The server attaches the Cinder volumes as block devices and connects to the respective networks.

### Heat Template Resources for pre-provisioned Dataplane Nodes in HotStack Scenarios

This section explains the resources defined in a Heat Orchestration Template (HOT) used in a HotStack scenario to configure the Dataplane nodes. These resources include user management, hostname configuration, Neutron ports, a trunk port, and a Nova server. This example is for a compute node, but tha same pattern is used for Networker nodes in the scenarios that include that node type. For scenarios featuring multiple Dataplane nodes a single shared `dataplane_users` resource can be used.

- **dataplane_users**
   - **Type**: OS::Heat::CloudConfig
   - **Purpose**: Creates a new user named "cloud-admin" with specific settings, such as the SSH public key.

- **computeX_hostname**
   - **Type**: OS::Heat::CloudConfig
   - **Purpose**: Sets the hostname and fully qualified domain name for the Dataplane node.

- **computeX_init**
   - **Type**: OS::Heat::MultipartMime
   - **Purpose**: Combines the user management and hostname configuration into a single configuration.

- **computeX-ctlplane-trunk-parent-port**
   - **Type**: OS::Neutron::Port
   - **Purpose**: Creates a Neutron port with a fixed IP address for the Dataplane node's control plane interface.

- **computeX-internal-api-port**
   - **Type**: OS::Neutron::Port
   - **Purpose**: Creates a Neutron port with a fixed IP address for the Dataplane node's internal API interface.

- **computeX-storage-port**
   - **Type**: OS::Neutron::Port
   - **Purpose**: Creates a Neutron port with a fixed IP address for the Dataplane node's storage interface.

- **computeX-tenant-port**
   - **Type**: OS::Neutron::Port
   - **Purpose**: Creates a Neutron port with a fixed IP address for the Dataplane node's tenant interface.

- **computeX-trunk0**
   - **Type**: OS::Neutron::Trunk
   - **Purpose**: Combines multiple network interfaces (internal API, storage, and tenant) into a single trunk port, allowing the Dataplane node to communicate with different networks using VLAN segmentation.

- **computeX**
   - **Type**: OS::Nova::Server
   - **Purpose**: Creates a Nova server for the Dataplane node using the specified image, flavor, and network interfaces. The server uses a config drive for additional configuration data and connects to the respective networks through the trunk port.

      // Assisted by watsonx Code Assistant
// Code generated by WCA@IBM in this programming language is not approved for use in IBM product development.

### Heat Template Resources for Dataplane Baremetal Hosts in HotStack Scenarios

This section explains the resources defined in a Heat Orchestration Template (HOT) used in a HotStack scenario to configure Dataplane Baremetal Hosts. These resources include Neutron ports, a trunk port, and a Nova server for the Baremetal Host.

- **bmhX-ctlplane-trunk-parent-port**, **bmhX-internal-api-port**, **bmhX-storage-port**, **bmhX-tenant-port**, and **bmhX-provisioning-port**
   - **Type**: OS::Neutron::Port
   - **Purpose**: Creates Neutron ports for the Baremetal Host, connecting them to the respective networks (e.g., `ctlplane-net-1`, `internal-api-net`, `storage-net`, `tenant-net`, or `provisioning-net-0`) with port security disabled.

- **bmhX-trunk0**
   - **Type**: OS::Neutron::Trunk
   - **Purpose**: Combines multiple network interfaces (internal API, storage, tenant, and provisioning) into a single trunk port, allowing the Baremetal Host to communicate with different networks using VLAN segmentation.

- **bmhX**
   - **Type**: OS::Nova::Server
   - **Purpose**: Creates a Nova server for the Baremetal Host using the specified flavor and block devices. The block devices include a root disk and a CD-ROM device, with the root disk using the image specified in the `image` property of the `bmh_params` dictionary and the CD-ROM device using the image specified in the `cd_image` property of the `bmh_params` dictionary. The server connects to the respective networks through the trunk port and the `bmhX-ctlplane-trunk-parent-port` Neutron port.

### Heat Template Resources for Ironic Nodes in HotStack Scenarios

This section explains the resources defined in a Heat Orchestration Template (HOT) used in a HotStack scenario to configure the Ironic nodes. These resources include Neutron ports and Nova servers for the Ironic nodes.

- **ironicX-port**
   - **Type**: OS::Neutron::Port
   - **Purpose**: Creates Neutron port for the Ironic node, connecting it to the `ironic-net` network with port security disabled.

- **ironicX**
   - **Type**: OS::Nova::Server
   - **Purpose**: Creates Nova server for the Ironic node using the specified flavor and block devices. The block devices include a root disk and a CD-ROM device, with the root disk using the image specified in the `image` property of the `ironics_params` dictionary and the CD-ROM device using the image specified in the `cd_image` property of the `ironics_params` dictionary. The server connect to the respective networks through the Neutron port.

## Heat Template Output Values in HotStack Scenarios

This section explains the output values generated by a Heat Orchestration Template (HOT) in a HotStack scenario. The output values provide essential information about the deployed resources, which are used by hotstack to configure and manage the infrastructure deployed by heat on Openstack.

### Output Values

- **controller_floating_ip**
   - **Description**: The floating IP address of the Controller node.
   - **Value**: The actual floating IP address of the Controller node.

- **sushy_emulator_uuids**
   - **Description**: UUIDs of instances that can be managed with sushy-tools, which is a tool for interacting with RedFish-enabled virtual BMCs.
   - **Value**: The UUIDs of instances intended for virtual BMCs management.

- **ocp_install_config**
   - **Description**: The OCP install-config.yaml file, which is used to configure the OCP cluster during installation.
   - **Value**: Contains details such as the base domain, control plane and compute configurations, networking settings, and platform information.

- **ocp_agent_config**
   - **Description**: The OCP agent-config.yaml file, which is used to configure the OCP agent during installation.
   - **Value**: Contains details such as the rendezvous IP, additional NTP sources, boot artifacts base URL, and host configurations.

- **controller_ansible_host**
   - **Description**: The Ansible host information for the Controller node. This can be passed to the `ansible.builtin.add_host` module.
   - **Value**: Includes the hostname, SSH user, IP address, and SSH common arguments.

- **ansible_inventory**
   - **Description**: The Ansible inventory file for the OCP cluster.
   - **Value**: Defines the hosts and groups for the controller, OCPs, and other nodes, along with their respective Ansible connection, user, and private key file information.
